## OSACC Reflection
Sammie Veeler

I am sincerely grateful to have shared space and learned from such an incredible group of people at OSACC this year. The tone of the conference overall was effusive and optimistic, and I think it’s telling that the most dour guided discussion at the conference concerned AI. It seems a dominant theme of our collective lamentation was the lack of consent or consideration of the social effects of this new technology, and the lack of agency to change the trajectory. It was really special to spend time with so many people who build tools in deep consideration of who will actually use them once they’re made. The question of “who are you making this for” is embedded in every project I witnessed, and it’s so valuable to be in a space where these questions are given the care they deserve. 

I have been interested in access since I began my art career almost four years ago, and have been privileged to be in community with many others who share this orientation. I appreciate the idea Qianqian shared with me early on that access = accessibility + inclusion. Access can be measured not by who is allowed to enter a space, but who is encouraged to enter. Which might explain why Qianqian kept inviting me to apply for the p5 Sound Fellowship even though I don’t know how to code. I was touched that the conference was intentionally organized to include the OGs of creative code, but also current undergrads and non-coders. There was an embodied atmosphere that contributions to open source projects go beyond pull requests. It was a privilege to witness the multiplicity of voices sharing the tools they made, but more importantly why they made them and who they made them for.

This was only the second time anyone has offered to fly me somewhere to attend a conference and I’m still getting used to the idea that I have something meaningful to share in situations like this. I was initially quite nervous to lead a guided discussion on accessibility, because I had learned so much of what I know from others in the room like Lauren and Nat. I’m unlearning the idea that I have to have all of the answers. It’s clear that access is not a problem to be solved, but an ongoing process– a way of being in this new networked world. We share our tools, source code and all, and we teach one another how to think about using them. 

It was especially meaningful to participate in the working group to update the access statement. We are all accustomed to building deep collegial relationships over Zoom, but there is no substitute for sharing space and giving collective care to the language we use to invite others into our community.  One of the first things I learned about the p5 community was that the access statement is published on GitHub, amendments can be proposed through pull requests, and it is revised each year by community members. This poetic gesture encodes the idea that contributions to the document are of the same nature as those to the codebase. 

Our work is about technology, but it is equally concerned with culture. I left the conference with a much clearer sense of open source culture and a desire to participate more, maybe even one day with code.
