## OSACC Reflection

Dave Pagurek

When developing the WebGL mode of p5.js, there are many goals pulling its design in different directions. It should be _flexible_ and let artists tinker and explore. It should be _understandable_ so that artists can feel confident while doing so. It should be _extensible_ so that it can grow as needs change. It should be _simple to maintain_ so that volunteers can continue to build it. The biggest takeaway from OSACC for me was the idea that all these problems can be examined through the lens of _access._

I came into the conference with a problem tangled up in all those goals: how can p5's WebGL mode run faster? Running faster seems abstractly "better," but may come at a cost of complexity. How do we evaluate these costs and work to improve them?

Using access to frame the conversation helped me untangle things. Performance is a part of what it means for sketches to be accessible. We hope that the viewing experience is acceptable for users on a variety of devices, not just ones with highest-end hardware. If one wants to _write_ software that runs as well as possible everywhere, that too benefits from better access: writing high-performance software generally involves deep, specialized knowledge that isn't easily attained. Finally, the library itself needs to be maintained, but jumping into a complex system is hard. We want to increase access to those interested in contributing. 

As part of our discussion groups, we talked about how access fits into the wider software landscape. Often, access is treated merely as a compliance checkbox, or responsibility is placed upon the shoulders of users as an afterthought. We want to break this pattern and foreground access. How can we make it simple and valuable for users?

We talked a lot about where design fits in. We got some inspiration from our friends at [Shader Park](https://shaderpark.com/), a library geared at writing 3D raymarched shaders. Although they tackle a complex, performance-heavy topic, their library distills it into building blocks that feel empowering to combine and create with. Similarly, if there are design patterns that we know work well for a task, we can aim to design APIs where the easiest way to accomplish that task is using that pattern. We now have plans in the works to make some currently advanced topics, shaders and custom 3D geometry, better integrated into p5.

Documentation and its organization was another common topic. Best practices should be demonstrated in every example. If accessibility is treated as the default, always present, it fosters a culture of designing with accessibility in mind rather than as an afterthought. Structure can also empower users. High-level tutorials should direct readers to relevant topics early on in their learning process. The different tools available, when one should use them and why, should be apparent in the structure so that readers don't get lost in a homogenous documentation soup. We're considering new workflows that reduce the friction in writing and translating this documentation, which will hopefully encourage more to be written.

Encouraging more contribution was a recurring theme. A great point was mentioned: when users encounter a bug, they may not know it's a bug! They may blame their own code or be unsure of how to continue. On the pages where one might look for help, we're hoping we can make it clear that open source software is forever a work in progress, and that we're super appreciative of people getting involved when they suspect they have found an area needing improvement. Filing a bug is a great first contribution, and can be a gateway to more if we can be as encouraging as possible through that process.

If someone wants to help contribute code, navigating the codebase can be daunting. There are many pieces and the flow of data through them is complicated. Some writing and explanation can go a long way. This could take the form of a more up-to-date and complete description of the system architecture. It also benefits from explaining not just the current state, but what the design goals were, and why we picked the solutions we picked, making the system's "folk knowledge" public. This is an area we can improve a lot, and one that I personally hope to work on.

Eventually, we worked through the conference schedule, and it was time to leave Denver. I still had many tasks lined up for me, but I left with newfound confidence in our process. P5 asks contributors to look at every feature through an access lens, and I've seen firsthand how this helps bring clarity to the goals of the project and guides it towards solutions that lead to better software for everyone.
