## OSACC Reflection: Arriving at a Politics of Nearness in Open-Source
Tristan Espinoza

Access (and the related word “accessibility”) is, broadly speaking, a materialist concern. That is to say, when we discuss access and whether or not something is accessible, we are discussing the material conditions that are faced by our bodies in the most literal sense. Dig deep enough and we’ll find that the etymology of the word “access” reflects this priority. It comes from the Latin _accedere_, meaning “to approach”, or “a coming near”. Later it begins to connote other ideas, including illness. Thinking about the etymological roots of “access” brings our concerns about movement, health, and ability — factors which shape our capacities for nearness — back to the body. 

A common practice for advancing access, especially in digital contexts, is publishing an access statement. Access statements are documents that lay out the limitations of how a tool may be accessed. Websites, for example, may release an access statement to clarify what parts of a site are accessible / not accessible, and what standards (if any) they are attempting to conform to. For those who use them, access statements can manage change by mapping new developments to the fulfillment of access needs. Through access statements, a community can define what protocols, guideposts, expectations, and priorities exist for expanding access.

During the 2023 Open Source Arts Contributors Conference, I joined a working group that was centered on updating the access statement for p5.js. I was interested in contributing because I was already invested in the tool and community; p5.js and Processing have been formative parts of my practice, both seeding a long-term interest in code and the arts. We spent two days looking over p5’s guiding statements, which included the community statement, the code of conduct, and the access statement. Collectively, we discussed: what role does each statement serve? In what ways are the statements legible or illegible to the community? Can we be specific about how they increase access? Thinking through these questions was necessary for clarifying our intentions with each other along with p5’s commitment to access.

The current statement acknowledges how structural barriers have prevented access within software and the arts. If we commit to dismantling them, we must also consider: what do these commitments ask of us, politically and ideologically? And what infrastructure is in place to enact them? For any organizing that moves with anti-capitalist / decolonial tendencies, this is often where things get overwhelming, because confronting structural issues forces us to grasp the root of the system that produces oppression, inaccessibility, etc. For me, it was grounding to find parallels between writing the access statement and my background with zine-making practices. [Tiny Tech Zines](https://tinytechzines.org/) (TTZ) is a zine fair and collective I co-organize with friends. We focus on zines about technology which we share through pop-ups, public programming, and tabling at zine events. Our collective narrative of tech is abstract, fragmented, and dependent on capital; in contrast, zines are physical, networked, and cheap to produce. If we think about access as a form of nearness, then zines can open up how we might think about or relate to technology and bring us closer to an alternative, more accessible vision. Similarly, working on the p5 statement expands what is possible in terms of contributions to open-source software. Typically when we think about contributing to open-source, it means writing code, fixing documentation, etc. While there is lots of support for these pathways through programs like the Processing Fellowship, being able to work on something like the p5 access statement sets up new points of entry and challenges what is / isn’t considered a contribution within open-source.

Disability Justice teaches us that our material and cognitive realities are valid, and that access needs emerge because structural oppressions have withdrawn forms of access from us. From that position, refining the p5 access statement was like crafting a counternarrative. p5’s access statement roots itself in the different forms of marginalization people might face while entering software and the arts. It invited us to bring in our own lived experiences, and working on it set an example for thinking more expansively about access as structural and political, especially within the context of open source software.
