## OSACC Reflection: Challenges to Impactful Actions Towards Increased Access

Caleb Foss

My position in relation to access is one of privilege. My identity, background, and physical and cognitive abilities grant me easy, well-supported access to programmatic tools as well as the learning resources to use them. I am cautious about the risk of "access" acting as a buzzword that better serves people like me than people who face barriers, exclusion, and alienation. Supporting access is one of my responsibilities as an educator and as a contributor to projects like p5.js. 

At the Open Source Arts Contributors Conference, I presented a project I am working on called [Marker](https://github.com/calebfoss/p5-marker), which is informed by my experience working with students learning to write code. The project’s goal is to open new ways for coding beginners to access p5’s capabilities. It aims to do so through minimized syntax, a more declarative rather than imperative style, debugging tools, and built-in collision detection. The project also aims to make accessible text descriptions for imagery more foregrounded in the sketch-writing structure and more directly linked with what they describe. Additionally, Marker includes a less text-based, more visual editor that is mobile-friendly and breaks a sketch into tab navigable, labeled snippets. I have high hopes for the access benefits this project can offer, but as of writing this reflection, its usability and accessibility have not yet been tested.

Later at OSACC, I joined in on the tail end of a working group focused on revising p5's Access, Community, and Code of Conduct Statements. Something I enjoyed about that document was the messiness of the edits. Saturated with comments and multicolored strikethroughs, the document reflected the challenge of collectively articulating what access means. I appreciated the intersectionality of the statement, acknowledging many forms of marginalization and systemic injustice. 

On the other hand, I think that complexity also presents a danger. A mission that is difficult to define is also difficult to evaluate. This is where access can potentially better serve privileged people by offering a mission that sounds good but is ambiguous enough to obfuscate the actual impact (or lack thereof). I think the group revising the statement helped to mitigate this danger through language specificity. In notes from the discussion leading up to the revisions, I see participants raising questions about how to hold the organization accountable for upholding the values articulated. One such note asks “what are goals, detailed transparency, timelines happening behind the scenes to create access.” I think the answers to these questions are ultimately more important than the statements. 

Beyond the access statement revision group, a recurring topic at OSACC I noticed was financial sustainability. Participants discussed the struggle to obtain funding for open source organizations as well as concerns about the impact of AI on individual artists’ income. I felt profoundly frustrated learning about participants’ incredible work, knowing that, while this work is impactful and valued, it often does not translate to sustainable income. 

The open sharing of creative coding projects online, on the one hand, offers abundant inspiration and learning tools for others and a rich landscape of creative work available for any internet user to experience. On the other hand, AI language models can exploit this, using the public code as training data and profiting off it. Having prompted AI models to write p5 sketches and watching them respond with working code, I am aware this is already in practice. This leads me to wonder how p5 can approach access with mindfulness toward sustainability and the dangers of exploitation.

After returning from OSACC, I asked students in a class I was teaching about their perspective on access: “What does accessibility mean to you?” and “As designers, how can we expand access?” Answers ranged from specific accessibility like image descriptions on websites and closed captions for media with audio to broader principles like “Ask people what they need to have ease of access and implement it.”

That last student response stuck with me in particular because it points to a challenge for the open source community. My Marker project, for example, would greatly benefit from usability testing so that the features can develop based on what users need. Running tests and collecting data, however, often requires resources with limited access. Members of the community do not necessarily have access to the tools, funds, academic resources, etc. to conduct tests, and they may not have the platform to survey a significant number of users. I understand that the Processing Foundation has arranged testing for new features, such as the friendly error system, and projects through fellowships and Google Summer of Code. I hope that the Processing Foundation can continue to allocate funding and utilize its community to help inform and evaluate actions towards increased access.
